---
id: 7497
title: '2016-07-10'
date: '2016-07-10T08:57:40-07:00'
author: cjtrowbridge
layout: post
guid: 'https://blog.cjtrowbridge.com/?p=7497'
permalink: /2016/07/10/2016-07-10-goals-update/
categories:
    - Goals
---

<div class="col-xs-12 col-sm-4">#### This Week

- Advance on [HackerRank](https://www.hackerrank.com/domains) **I dont feel like I've made enough time for this. I moved it to the top of my bookmarks to remind myself to take more time for it.**
- Eat Less **I feel like I have had success with this. I am eating less and working out more and my bodyfat percentage has gone down as a result.**
- Eat Better **I am eating a lot more salads and a lot less carbs.**
- Drink More Water  **I feel like I am doing well here, drinking at least a few liters of water per day.**
- Stay up on stock and financial news **I am staying up to date on stock and financial news. This has facilitated more sucess with day trading.**
- Yoga **I have not done any yoga since I came back to sac. I need to make this a bigger priority. I will try to attend at least one class this week.**
- Kayaking **Kayaking has always been the easiest goal to succeed in. I love kayaking and I make it happen as much as I can.**
- Watch a [documentary](https://www.reddit.com/r/Documentaries/) **I couldn't tell you the last time I sat down and watched a qhole documentary. I will create a calendar event to remind myself to do this this week.**
- Get rid of all the stuff ive been trying to sell **I finally sold my old thinkpad! Now just the old car left in this list. It should be repaired in the next couple of days and then I can start working towards getting rid of it.**
    - Ford Escape

</div><div class="col-xs-12 col-sm-4">#### This Month

- Take a discovery flight **This might have to wait until next month, but it's going to happen!**
- Take sailing lessons **Today, I will pay for this and then the classes take place in a couple weeks!**
- Play more [Chess](https://www.chesscademy.com/) **I haven't made a chance for chess lately. I will put an event in my calendar to make this happen.**
- Get a new [kayak](http://sacramento.craigslist.org/search/sss?query=kayak&sort=rel&min_price=20&max_price=200) **This hasn't been a priority as my old one was less damaged than I thought, and my new car would be hard to put a hard kayak on. I will cancel this goal.**
- More Amateur Radio **I have started carrying it around with me but haven't made a chance to use it. I will create a calendar entry this week to find a few stations to start listening to.**
- More Scuba **I met someone who is certified! This is a less urgent goal but still one that I want to accomplish. I will try to find an opportunity for this.**
- Practice Languages 
    - German
    - Japanese
    - French
    - Spanish
    - ASL
- Try a new [hobby](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_hobbies) **I will make a calendar entry to do one of these this week.**

</div><div class="col-xs-12 col-sm-4">#### This Year

- BE quantitatively closer to a degree. **I will sign up for sierra this week, marking this goal complete.**
- Double my gross monthly income from $2600 to $5200 **I have made great progress. I am 30% of the way there.**
- At least half of that new income should be from new sources: $1300/mo ($325/wk). 
    - Lyft? **I am getting a new california driver's license this week which will take care of the application for lyft.**
- Start a profitable new business 
    - Food Carts(?)
    - Local NPO/NGO Fundraising(?)
- Learn Achery
- Learn to shoot
- Learn The Constellations
- Learn More Programming Languages 
    - C++
    - Lisp(?)
    - Scheme(?)
- Learn More Languages 
    - Russian
    - Latin

</div>