---
id: 9109
title: '❤️ Robert Greene &#8211; The 48 Laws of Power'
date: '2017-09-23T12:33:21-07:00'
author: cjtrowbridge
layout: post
guid: 'https://blog.cjtrowbridge.com/?p=9109'
permalink: /2017/09/23/robert-greene-48-laws-power/
image: /wp-content/uploads/2017/09/The-48-Laws-Of-Power-by-Robert-Green-1.jpg
categories:
    - Blog
    - 'Reading List'
    - Revisit
---

This book was recommended by a friend. He said it reminded him of a shared favorite of ours, [How To Win Friends and Influence People by Dale Carnegie](https://blog.cjtrowbridge.com/2016/12/01/dale-carnegie-how-to-win-friends-and-influence-people/). It reminds me of [The Game by Neil Strauss](https://blog.cjtrowbridge.com/2017/04/15/neil-strauss-the-game/). This book could be used for great evil, or for good. And like The Game, it will certainly be used against you whether or not the wielder even knows what they are doing. For that reason alone, everyone should be familiar with this subject. In the preface, the author also references Niccolo Machiavelli's The Prince. Another book in the same vein which I intend to read soon. The 48 Laws of Power is a great read which I will certainly revisit many times and recommend to anyone I meet who aspires to power.

> The feeling of having no power over people and events is generally unbearable to us — when we feel helpless we feel miserable. No one wants less power; everyone wants more. In the world today, however, it is dangerous to seem too power hungry, to be overt with your power moves. We have to seem fair and decent so we need to be subtle — congenial yet cunning, democratic yet devious.

Here is a summary of the list of laws which I will revisit on a regular basis to refresh my memory, like I do with Carnegie's list. **Law 1:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Never Outshine the Master</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Always make those above you feel comfortably superior. In your desire to please or impress </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">them, do not go too far in displaying your talents or you might accomplish the opposite – inspire </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">fear and insecurity. Make your masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will attain </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">the heights of power.</span>**Law 2:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Never put too Much Trust in Friends, Learn how to use Enemies</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Be wary of friends-they will betray you more quickly, for they are easily aroused to envy. They </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">also become spoiled and tyrannical. But hire a former enemy and he will be more loyal than a </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">friend, because he has more to prove. In fact, you have more to fear from friends than from </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">enemies. If you have no enemies, find a way to make them.</span>**Law 3:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Conceal your Intentions</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Keep people off-balance and in the dark by never revealing the purpose behind your actions. If </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">they have no clue what you are up to, they cannot prepare a defense. Guide them far enough </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">down the wrong path, envelope them in enough smoke, and by the time they realize your </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">intentions, it will be too late.</span>**Law 4:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Always Say Less than Necessary</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">When you are trying to impress people with words, the more you say, the more common you </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">appear, and the less in control. Even if you are saying something banal, it will seem original if </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">you make it vague, open-ended, and sphinxlike. Powerful people impress and intimidate by </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">saying less. The more you say, the more likely you are to say something foolish.</span>**Law 5:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> So Much Depends on Reputation – Guard it with your Life</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Reputation is the cornerstone of power. Through reputation alone you can intimidate and win; </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">once you slip, however, you are vulnerable, and will be attacked on all sides. Make your </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">reputation unassailable. Always be alert to potential attacks and thwart them before they </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">happen. Meanwhile, learn to destroy your enemies by opening holes in their own reputations. </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Then stand aside and let public opinion hang them.</span>**Law 6:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Court Attention at all Cost</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Everything is judged by its appearance; what is unseen counts for nothing. Never let yourself get lost in the crowd, then, or buried in oblivion. Stand out. Be conspicuous, at all cost. Make </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">yourself a magnet of attention by appearing larger, more colorful, more mysterious, than the </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">bland and timid masses.</span>**Law 7:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Get others to do the Work for you, but Always Take the Credit</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Use the wisdom, knowledge, and legwork of other people to further your own cause. Not only </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">will such assistance save you valuable time and energy, it will give you a godlike aura of </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">efficiency and speed. In the end your helpers will be forgotten and you will be remembered. </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Never do yourself what others can do for you.</span>**Law 8:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Make other People come to you – use Bait if Necessary</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">When you force the other person to act, you are the one in control. It is always better to make </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">your opponent come to you, abandoning his own plans in the process. Lure him with fabulous </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">gains – then attack. You hold the cards.</span>**Law 9:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Win through your Actions, Never through Argument</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Any momentary triumph you think gained through argument is really a Pyrrhic victory: The </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">resentment and ill will you stir up is stronger and lasts longer than any momentary change of </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">opinion. It is much more powerful to get others to agree with you through your actions, without </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">saying a word. Demonstrate, do not explicate.</span>**Law 10:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Infection: Avoid the Unhappy and Unlucky</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">You can die from someone else’s misery – emotional states are as infectious as disease. You </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">may feel you are helping the drowning man but you are only precipitating your own disaster. </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">The unfortunate sometimes draw misfortune on themselves; they will also draw it on you. </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Associate with the happy and fortunate instead.</span>**Law 11:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Learn to Keep People Dependent on You</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">To maintain your independence you must always be needed and wanted. The more you are </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">relied on, the more freedom you have. Make people depend on you for their happiness and </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">prosperity and you have nothing to fear. Never teach them enough so that they can do without </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">you.</span>**Law 12:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Use Selective Honesty and Generosity to Disarm your Victim</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of dishonest ones. Open-hearted gestures </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">of honesty and generosity bring down the guard of even the most suspicious people. Once your </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">selective honesty opens a hole in their armor, you can deceive and manipulate them at will. A </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">timely gift – a Trojan horse – will serve the same purpose.</span>**Law 13:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> When Asking for Help, Appeal to People’s Self-Interest, </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Never to their Mercy or Gratitude </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">If you need to turn to an ally for help, do not bother to remind him of your past assistance and </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">good deeds. He will find a way to ignore you. Instead, uncover something in your request, or in </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">your alliance with him, that will benefit him, and emphasize it out of all proportion. He will </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">respond enthusiastically when he sees something to be gained for himself.</span>**Law 14:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Pose as a Friend, Work as a Spy</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Knowing about your rival is critical. Use spies to gather valuable information that will keep you </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">a step ahead. Better still: Play the spy yourself. In polite social encounters, learn to probe. Ask </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">indirect questions to get people to reveal their weaknesses and intentions. There is no occasion </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">that is not an opportunity for artful spying.</span>**Law 15:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Crush your Enemy Totally</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">All great leaders since Moses have known that a feared enemy must be crushed completely. </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">(Sometimes they have learned this the hard way.) If one ember is left alight, no matter how </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">dimly it smolders, a fire will eventually break out. More is lost through stopping halfway than </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">through total annihilation: The enemy will recover, and will seek revenge. Crush him, not only </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">in body but in spirit.</span>**Law 16:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Use Absence to Increase Respect and Honor</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Too much circulation makes the price go down: The more you are seen and heard from, the </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">more common you appear. If you are already established in a group, temporary withdrawal from </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">it will make you more talked about, even more admired. You must learn when to leave. Create </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">value through scarcity.</span>**Law 17:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Keep Others in Suspended Terror: Cultivate an Air of Unpredictability</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Humans are creatures of habit with an insatiable need to see familiarity in other people’s </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">actions. Your predictability gives them a sense of control. Turn the tables: Be deliberately </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">unpredictable. Behavior that seems to have no consistency or purpose will keep them off balance, and they will wear themselves out trying to explain your moves. Taken to an extreme, this strategy can intimidate and terrorize.</span>**Law 18:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Do Not Build Fortresses to Protect Yourself – Isolation is Dangerous</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">The world is dangerous and enemies are everywhere – everyone has to protect themselves. A </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">fortress seems the safest. But isolation exposes you to more dangers than it protects you from – it cuts you off from valuable information, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Better to </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">circulate among people find allies, mingle. You are shielded from your enemies by the crowd.</span>**Law 19:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Know Who You’re Dealing with – Do Not Offend the Wrong Person</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">There are many different kinds of people in the world, and you can never assume that everyone </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">will react to your strategies in the same way. Deceive or outmaneuver some people and they will </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">spend the rest of their lives seeking revenge. They are wolves in lambs’ clothing. Choose your </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">victims and opponents carefully, then – never offend or deceive the wrong person.</span>**Law 20:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Do Not Commit to Anyone</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">It is the fool who always rushes to take sides. Do not commit to any side or cause but yourself. </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">By maintaining your independence, you become the master of others – playing people against </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">one another, making them pursue you.</span>**Law 21:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Play a Sucker to Catch a Sucker – Seem Dumber than your Mark</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">No one likes feeling stupider than the next persons. The trick, is to make your victims feel smart </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">– and not just smart, but smarter than you are. Once convinced of this, they will never suspect </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">that you may have ulterior motives.</span>**Law 22:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Use the Surrender Tactic: Transform Weakness into Power</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">When you are weaker, never fight for honor’s sake; choose surrender instead. Surrender gives </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">you time to recover, time to torment and irritate your conqueror, time to wait for his power to </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">wane. Do not give him the satisfaction of fighting and defeating you – surrender first. By </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">turning the other check you infuriate and unsettle him. Make surrender a tool of power.</span>**Law 23:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Concentrate Your Forces</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Conserve your forces and energies by keeping them concentrated at their strongest point. You </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">gain more by finding a rich mine and mining it deeper, than by flitting from one shallow mine to </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">another – intensity defeats extensity every time. When looking for sources of power to elevate </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">you, find the one key patron, the fat cow who will give you milk for a long time to come.</span>**Law 24:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Play the Perfect Courtier</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">The perfect courtier thrives in a world where everything revolves around power and political </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">dexterity. He has mastered the art of indirection; he flatters, yields to superiors, and asserts </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">power over others in the mot oblique and graceful manner. Learn and apply the laws of </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">courtiership and there will be no limit to how far you can rise in the court.</span>**Law 25:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Re-Create Yourself</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Do not accept the roles that society foists on you. Re-create yourself by forging a new identity, </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">one that commands attention and never bores the audience. Be the master of your own image </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">rather than letting others define if for you. Incorporate dramatic devices into your public </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">gestures and actions – your power will be enhanced and your character will seem larger than life.</span>**Law 26:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Keep Your Hands Clean</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">You must seem a paragon of civility and efficiency: Your hands are never soiled by mistakes and </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">nasty deeds. Maintain such a spotless appearance by using others as scapegoats and cat’s-paws to disguise your involvement.</span>**Law 27:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Play on People’s Need to Believe to Create a Cultlike Following</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">People have an overwhelming desire to believe in something. Become the focal point of such </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">desire by offering them a cause, a new faith to follow. Keep your words vague but full of </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">promise; emphasize enthusiasm over rationality and clear thinking. Give your new disciples </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">rituals to perform, ask them to make sacrifices on your behalf. In the absence of organized </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">religion and grand causes, your new belief system will bring you untold power.</span>**Law 28:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Enter Action with Boldness</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">If you are unsure of a course of action, do not attempt it. Your doubts and hesitations will infect </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">your execution. Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any mistakes you </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">commit through audacity are easily corrected with more audacity. Everyone admires the bold; </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">no one honors the timid.</span>**Law 29:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Plan All the Way to the End</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">The ending is everything. Plan all the way to it, taking into account all the possible </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">consequences, obstacles, and twists of fortune that might reverse your hard work and give the </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">glory to others. By planning to the end you will not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">will know when to stop. Gently guide fortune and help determine the future by thinking far </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">ahead.</span>**Law 30:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Make your Accomplishments Seem Effortless</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease. All the toil and practice that go into </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">them, and also all the clever tricks, must be concealed. When you act, act effortlessly, as if you </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">could do much more. Avoid the temptation of revealing how hard you work – it only raises </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">questions. Teach no one your tricks or they will be used against you.</span>**Law 31:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Control the Options: Get Others to Play with the Cards you Deal</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">The best deceptions are the ones that seem to give the other person a choice: Your victims feel </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">they are in control, but are actually your puppets. Give people options that come out in your </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">favor whichever one they choose. Force them to make choices between the lesser of two evils, </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">both of which serve your purpose. Put them on the horns of a dilemma: They are gored </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">wherever they turn.</span>**Law 32:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Play to People’s Fantasies</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">The truth is often avoided because it is ugly and unpleasant. Never appeal to truth and reality </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">unless you are prepared for the anger that comes for disenchantment. Life is so harsh and </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">distressing that people who can manufacture romance or conjure up fantasy are like oases in the desert: Everyone flocks to them. There is great power in tapping into the fantasies of the masses.</span>**Law 33:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Discover Each Man’s Thumbscrew</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castle wall. That weakness is usual y an insecurity, an </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">uncontrollable emotion or need; it can also be a small secret pleasure. Either way, once found, it </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">is a thumbscrew you can turn to your advantage.</span>**Law 34:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Be Royal in your Own Fashion: Act like a King to be treated like one</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">The way you carry yourself will often determine how you are treated; In the long run, appearing </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">vulgar or common will make people disrespect you. For a king respects himself and inspires the </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">same sentiment in others. By acting regally and confident of your powers, you make yourself </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">seem destined to wear a crown.</span>**Law 35:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Master the Art of Timing</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Never seem to be in a hurry – hurrying betrays a lack of control over yourself, and over time. </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Always seem patient, as if you know that everything will come to you eventually. Become a </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">detective of the right moment; sniff out the spirit of the times, the trends that will carry you to </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">power. Learn to stand back when the time is not yet ripe, and to strike fiercely when it has </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">reached fruition.</span>**Law 36:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Disdain Things you cannot have: Ignoring them is the best Revenge</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">By acknowledging a petty problem you give it existence and credibility. The more attention you </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">pay an enemy, the stronger you make him; and a small mistake is often made worse and more </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">visible when you try to fix it. It is sometimes best to leave things alone. If there is something </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">you want but cannot have, show contempt for it. The less interest you reveal, the more superior </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">you seem.</span>**Law 37:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Create Compelling Spectacles</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Striking imagery and grand symbolic gestures create the aura of power – everyone responds to </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">them. Stage spectacles for those around you, then full of arresting visuals and radiant symbols </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">that heighten your presence. Dazzled by appearances, no one will notice what you are really </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">doing.</span>**Law 38:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Think as you like but Behave like others</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">If you make a show of going against the times, flaunting your unconventional ideas and </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">unorthodox ways, people will think that you only want attention and that you look down upon </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">them. They will find a way to punish you for making them feel inferior. It is far safer to blend </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">in and nurture the common touch. Share your originality only with tolerant friends and those who </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">are sure to appreciate your uniqueness.</span>**Law 39:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Stir up Waters to Catch Fish</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Anger and emotion are strategically counterproductive. You must always stay calm and </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">objective. But if you can make your enemies angry while staying calm yourself, you gain a </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">decided advantage. Put your enemies off-balance: Find the chink in their vanity through which </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">you can rattle them and you hold the strings.</span>**Law 40:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Despise the Free Lunch</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">What is offered for free is dangerous – it usually involves either a trick or a hidden obligation. </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">What has worth is worth paying for. By paying your own way you stay clear of gratitude, guilt, </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">and deceit. It is also often wise to pay the full price – there is no cutting corners with </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">excellence. Be lavish with your money and keep it circulating, for generosity is a sign and a </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">magnet for power.</span>**Law 41:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Avoid Stepping into a Great Man’s Shoes</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">What happens first always appears better and more original than what comes after. If you </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">succeed a great man or have a famous parent, you will have to accomplish double their </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">achievements to outshine them. Do not get lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not of your </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">own making: Establish your own name and identity by changing course. Slay the overbearing </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">father, disparage his legacy, and gain power by shining in your own way.</span>**Law 42:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Strike the Shepherd and the Sheep will Scatter</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Trouble can often be traced to a single strong individual – the stirrer, the arrogant underling, the </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">poisoned of goodwill. If you allow such people room to operate, others will succumb to their </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">influence. Do not wait for the troubles they cause to multiply, do not try to negotiate with them </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">– they are irredeemable. Neutralize their influence by isolating or banishing them. Strike at the </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">source of the trouble and the sheep will scatter.</span>**Law 43:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Work on the Hearts and Minds of Others</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Coercion creates a reaction that will eventually work against you. You must seduce others into </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">wanting to move in your direction. A person you have seduced becomes your loyal pawn. And </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">the way to seduce others is to operate on their individual psychologies and weaknesses. Soften </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">up the resistant by working on their emotions, playing on what they hold dear and what they </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">fear. Ignore the hearts and minds of others and they will grow to hate you.</span>**Law 44:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Disarm and Infuriate with the Mirror Effect</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">The mirror reflects reality, but it is also the perfect tool for deception: When you mirror your </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">enemies, doing exactly as they do, they cannot figure out your strategy. The Mirror Effect </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">mocks and humiliates them, making them overreact. By holding up a mirror to their psyches, </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">you seduce them with the illusion that you share their values; by holding up a mirror to their </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">actions, you teach them a lesson. Few can resist the power of Mirror Effect.</span>**Law 45:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Preach the Need for Change, but Never Reform too much at Once</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Everyone understands the need for change in the abstract, but on the day-to-day level people are creatures of habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and will lead to revolt. If you are new to a position of power, or an outsider trying to build a power base, make a show of respecting the old way of doing things. If change is necessary, make it feel like a gentle improvement on the past.</span>**Law 46:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Never appear too Perfect</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">Appearing better than others is always dangerous, but most dangerous of all is to appear to have no faults or weaknesses. Envy creates silent enemies. It is smart to occasionally display defects, and admit to harmless vices, in order to deflect envy and appear more human and approachable. Only gods and the dead can seem perfect with impunity.</span>**Law 47:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Do not go Past the Mark you Aimed for</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">In Victory, Learn when to Stop </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">the moment of victory is often the moment of greatest peril. In the heat of victory, arrogance </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">and overconfidence can push you past the goal you had aimed for, and by going too far, you </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">make more enemies than you defeat. Do not allow success to go to your head. There is no </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">substitute for strategy and careful planning. Set a goal, and when you reach it, stop.</span>**Law 48:**<span style="font-weight: 400;"> Assume Formlessness</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">By taking a shape, by having a visible plan, you open yourself to attack. Instead of taking a form </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">for your enemy to grasp, keep yourself adaptable and on the move. Accept the fact that nothing </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">is certain and no law is fixed. The best way to protect yourself is to be as fluid and formless as </span><span style="font-weight: 400;">water; never bet on stability or lasting order. Everything changes.</span>