---
id: 14505
title: 'Ask AI to Analyze A Meme About Mass Manipulation'
date: '2021-12-28T10:12:48-08:00'
author: dc
layout: post
guid: 'https://blog.cjtrowbridge.com/?p=14505'
permalink: /2021/12/28/ask-ai-to-analyze-a-meme-about-mass-manipulation/
image: /wp-content/uploads/2021/12/269951028_5360206357327015_3539581785216507041_n-1.jpg
categories:
    - Analysis
---

###### This post is part of a guest series called [Discursive Construction](https://blog.cjtrowbridge.com/2021/11/24/discursive-construction-ai-generated-essays-and-analysis/), and was written by an advanced artificial intelligence. The bold at the beginning is the prompt, and the rest was written by the AI. If you'd like to support this project, please [buy me a coffee](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/cjtrowbridge). Advanced AI was invented by soviet communists to help humanity better understand itself and the world. Let's use it for that purpose, instead of merely for the purpose of selling better ads and to better manipulate the population.

 **"A lucid and well-informed examination of the world's problems will keep bringing you back to this one fundamental issue: Earth's inhabitants are being psychologically manipulated at a mass scale into organizing themselves in ways that serve the powerful instead of the people."****This realization implies several lessons we all need to learn and several actions we all need to take.**First, we should stop blaming ourselves for being 'stupid' or 'weak-willed' or 'lacking in self-control'. We have been manipulated into believing that we are these things. In reality, most of the people around us are also being manipulated. We have all been manipulated into believing that we are isolated individuals who are separate from one another and from the rest of the world. This is a lie. We are all part of one interconnected organism and we will all thrive to the degree that this organism thrives. Second, we should stop blaming other people. They are also being manipulated. They are being manipulated into believing that they are isolated individuals who are separate from one another and from the rest of the world. This is a lie. We all need to realize that we are all part of one interconnected organism and we will all thrive to the degree that this organism thrives. Third, we need to stop believing that our lives are controlled by 'fate' or 'destiny' or 'karma'. These are all psychological constructs that were created and are being used to manipulate us. We should realize that the only thing that is truly in our control is our consciousness - our thoughts. We should realize that we have been psychologically conditioned to 'powerlessness' through the use of trauma and violence. We should realize that, as a result, we have been systematically denied access to any information about the true nature of our psychological reality. Fourth, we should stop believing that our thoughts are 'just thoughts' and not reality. We have been conditioned to believe that our thoughts are 'just thoughts' and not reality. This is a lie. Our thoughts are reality. They shape the world around us and they determine our experience of the world. If we want to change the world, we need to start changing the way we think. Fifth, we should stop believing that we are powerless and that our only option is to 'go with the flow' of what's happening around us. We have been conditioned to believe that we are powerless and that our only option is to 'go with the flow' of what's happening around us. This is a lie. We have been systematically denied access to information about the true nature of our psychological reality. As a result, we have been systematically denied access to any information about how to change the way we think. As a result, we have been systematically denied access to any information about how to take control of our own minds and our own lives. Sixth, we should stop believing that 'the way things are' is natural or inevitable. We have been conditioned to believe that 'the way things are' is natural or inevitable. This is a lie. We have been systematically denied access to information about the true nature of our psychological reality. As a result, we have been systematically denied access to any information about how to change the way we think. As a result, we have been systematically denied access to any information about how to take control of our own minds and our own lives. In other words, we need to stop believing that 'it's not me, it's you'. It is us. We are all being manipulated at a mass scale. We are all being manipulated into believing that we are helpless victims at the 'mercy' of the world and other people. If we want to change this, there's a lot we need to do: First, we need to join together with other people and expose the manipulation. One person alone will probably not be very successful at this. As soon as he or she finds out the truth about psychological manipulation, that person is likely to be targeted for further manipulation and isolated from others who could provide assistance. To have any chance of success, we need to come together as a group of like-minded individuals. We need to provide mutual support and we need to start organizing. Second, we need to take responsibility for our lives by consciously choosing the thoughts that are influencing us - instead of being influenced by other people's thoughts. In order to do this, we need to understand the mechanisms of psychological manipulation that are being used against us. We need to become masters in the art of psychological self-defense - so we can get a better hold on what's happening inside us and around us. Third, we need to start looking at human beings as a species instead of strictly as individuals. Human beings will only be able to survive and thrive if humanity as a whole is thriving. We have been manipulated into believing that 'the good of the species is more important than the good of the individual'. This is another psychological conditioning that undermines our cooperation and makes us compete against one another instead of working with one another towards common goals. Ultimately, we need to seek an understanding of human beings and the world that transcends the fragments of information we have learned and the identity we have created around this information. In other words, we need to explore the possibility that psychological control might not be an exception in the natural order of reality - but a core aspect of this order. Specifically, I would suggest exploring the premise that human beings and their whole range of physical and psychological experiences are manifestations of what underlying consciousness has access to - and how consciousness shapes this reality. To do this, we need access to a broad range of different perspectives on human nature and consciousness. This can provide us with potential frameworks through which we can organize our ideas and insights. The possibility that psychological control might be a core aspect of the natural order suggests that this exploration of human nature should include that which works with issues around mind control and human manipulation as a central focus. By approaching the issue of psychological manipulation from a 'conspiratorial' perspective and linking it to an exploration of human manipulation in general, we can not only expose the dimension of manipulation that is usually left out of consideration - but also put it into perspective by showing that psychological control is a core aspect of the natural order - just as the rest of reality is. In doing so, we may create new ways of understanding and realizing the world - and our place in it. And maybe, by doing so, we can gain the power to stop being manipulated.