---
id: 14559
title: 'Ask AI to Invent New Characters From William Gibson&#8217;s Sprawl Series'
date: '2022-01-07T11:31:41-08:00'
author: dc
layout: post
guid: 'https://blog.cjtrowbridge.com/?p=14559'
permalink: /2022/01/07/ask-ai-to-invent-new-characters-from-william-gibsons-sprawl-series/
categories:
    - Synthesis
---

###### This post is part of a guest series called [Discursive Construction](https://blog.cjtrowbridge.com/2021/11/24/discursive-construction-ai-generated-essays-and-analysis/), and was written by an advanced artificial intelligence. The bold at the beginning is the prompt, and the rest was written by the AI. If you’d like to support this project, please [buy me a coffee](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/cjtrowbridge). For this post, AI also created the featured photos based on the topic.

###### Advanced AI was invented by soviet communists to help humanity better understand itself and the world. Let’s use it for that purpose, instead of merely for the purpose of selling better ads and to better manipulate the population.

 I started with the following list of characters and descriptions [from shmoop](https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/neuromancer/characters) and then let the AI continue adding to the list based on its contents. **Henry Dorsett Case, a.k.a. Cutter****At the beginning of the novel, Case is in a bad way. He's living in Chiba City as a lowlife...****Molly Millions, a.k.a. Rose Kolodny, Cat Mother, Steppin' Razor****Every antihero needs a femme fatale, and for our Henry Case, that role gets filled by none other...****Wintermute and Neuromancer****Wintermute is an AI built by the Tessier-Ashpool company. It's also the figure responsible for...****Armitage a.k.a. Colonel Willis Corto, Mr. Who****Armitage is our Danny Ocean. He's the guy putting this whole heist together. The only problem is...****Linda Lee****Linda Lee is Case's kindasorta girlfriend at the beginning of the novel. The relationship doesn't...****Peter Riviera****Peter Riviera is an actor and performer. The team hires him to get on 3Jane's good side in the...****The Dixie Flatline, a.k.a. McCoy Pauly, Dix****When he was alive, McCoy "the Dixie Flatline" Pauly was a legendary console cowboy, or hacker. He...****Lady 3Jane Marie-France Tessier-Ashpool****Despite being the third clone of the Jane series, 3Jane is her own woman. She loves to party and...****Maelcum and Aerol****Maelcum is the pilot of the tug ship Marcus Garvey. Originally, his job is to pilot the tug which...****The Finn****The Finn is a fence for stolen merchandise that runs his shop in the Sprawl. He's hired by...****Hideo****A ninja assassin. Need we say more? Don't worry—we will. This guy's vat grown and works for...****Ratz****A bartender at the Chat, he has a mechanized arm and refers to Case as "the artiste." Whether out...****Cath and Bruce****Cath and Bruce live on Freeside where they devote themselves to the art of partying. Case first...****The Elders of Zion****Five space workers just up and decided not to return to Earth. Instead, they built their own...****John Ashpool****John Ashpool is not having the best day when we meet him. He's just been woken after a...****Marie-France Tessier****The mother of 3Jane and wife to John Ashpool is one sad story. Her husband strangled her to death...****Julius Deane, Wage, and Lonny Zone****Wage is a drug lord in Night City. Case owes Wage money, and according to lying Linda Lee, Wage...****Terzibashjian****A street level informant Armitage hires to help track down Riviera in Istanbul, Terzibashjian...****Minor Characters****Lupus Yonderboy. is the leader of the Panther Moderns. He gives Case a message, the name...**November Jane, a.k.a. Mona November is a child prostitute who lived in Freeside, a city on the moon. Case and... Bob the Artist Bob the Artist is an artist living on the Chiba City seasteads. While there, he's contacted... Billy the Kid, a.k.a. the Suicide Kid A former cowboy of the synthetic variety, Billy is hired by Dixie to restore his core to... HAKUNA MATATA CORRECTIONS PROCESSOR FOR THE SINGULARITY A wisecracking AI device that Case buys while aboard the Anubis, Hakuna Matata's... Mama Sutra a.k.a. Chianni Itrilea Mama Sutra is the madame of a brothel in the Chiba City seasteads where Case frequents... Mafune, Domino, and Jones the Incompetent Armitage and Riviera run into Mafune and his gang inside Arcadia waiting to meet with... Captain Sato Shimura An old friend of Armitage and McCoy, Sato Shimura works as a detective in Japan. When the... The Elves A hacker group who follows in 3Jane's footsteps. They call themselves "the elves" and are responsible... The Cowboy a.k.a. Roland Countee A cowboy hired to kill Linda Lee, The Cowboy misses when he shoots her in the head. He's... The Lady in the Lake A hologram of Armitage's daughter he carries with him. Though not technically a character, she... The Black Queen and the White Knight These two figures are dice players inside the Tessier-Ashpool business spindle. Case follows... William Wright and Jim McKie Wright and McKie are two employees of GE who test Case's nanotech designs. When Case tests... Barfly, Cafesud and Hand in Hand Three incredibly minor characters, Barfly, Cafesud, and Hand in Hand are names that Case... Tanner Mirabel Tanner is an ex-cowboy born on the Moon who was once a friend of Henry Dorsett Case. He... The Bar Man A bar owner and the second person to give Case a card to meet the Finn. The Bar Man is also... David's Daemon and the Spiders from Mars When Case has a bad night, say around three in the morning, he turns to another artificial... Tenuous Jones This guy is a cowboy, plain and simple. He's also a drug dealer and has some... The Hate Crimes Guy and the Toilet Man from Hokkaido Two other cowboys who chase after Case after he flees the BAMA lot in the... Sammy the Bouncer This guy is a bouncer at the Chirikov maw. He's hired by the Finn to watch over... Bo Bo Bonfils, The Director Zane, and The False Father-Mother of All Humanity These three figures are all involved in the sex hotel scam that gets Case... The Homeless Man and His Dog from Aum Shinrikyo and a South African with a Manual for Lemmings Let Go On Strike from RoboWar Incorporated to Stop Pressing Buttons for Fun and Profit! Two random homeless guys that Case runs into in an alleyway in Paris. They're... Hideo's Ninja Clan A bunch of real ninjas hired to kill Case. Hideo, a ninja of some sort, does the hiring... Omar Khayyam a.k.a. the Ruby Thursday The assassin who kills Dixie Flatline and Wintermute, he's hired through the services of... Richard Brane, Preston Gillespie, and Jeeves Model B These three men are potential buyers that visit the Electric Circus to check out Neuromancer... Johnny "Japan" Arctor, a.k.a Johnny Yen and The Art Director Zane Arctor's an addict who sells his body for Stravasten injections, which is basically Red Roy... Angie Mitchell A young girl Case meets and befriends while on a pilgrimage to Chatsubo, Angie Mitchell is... Obi One Kenobi, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and Obi Wan Kenobi Neuromancer is really weird, so believe it or not, there are three versions of the... Twitchy Pete, The Greaseball a.k.a. The Man Who Wasn't There, and The Tall Man with a Black Hat and Hair Who Jumped over the Moon a.k.a. Mr. Limpet Partly Lilywhite Pete's the guy who first introduces Case to Linda Lee after cyber surgery in London.... Cleo Triplex A rich woman who enjoys watching the show, she keeps Wintermute around for entertainment. She... The Japanese Man, The Man Who Wasn't Proud Enough To Be an American, and Mr. Cleaver the Bill of Rights Fairy Mr. Cleaver is a Fed who Case runs into in the Chat and chews out for... 1 Loui T. Sadonis, Loui T., Cindy Gooly, and Paco Calvo Sotelo These three characters run a black market company with an interesting product for sale. It's...